so in this section we're going to talk about like what is programming and we're going to do so by
reviewing things like Python and C and the reason we take a look at this is that when we write Python
or C that code has to execute eventually in machine language so in the end any program that we can write
must also be representable in machine language so if we look at patterns in high level programming
we need to be able to replicate those patterns in machine language so I'm going to take you back in
time to 2008 when I first was teaching the course that would become Python for everybody on campus
at the University of Michigan this was chapter one slide 19 so this is for people who'd never seen a
computer never I mean never programmed a computer never didn't know what programming was and I
introduced computer architecture in slide 19 and why was that well my goal at that point was to
teach people that to become a programmer you kind of move into the machine your code moves
into the machine and it provides the instructions to the central processing unit and so your goal
to becoming a programmer is to be able to provide those instructions so you can have the overall
machine do the thing that you want to do now the key is those instructions and I said this
in chapter one slide 19 those instructions are zeros and ones and they are what is called
machine language and those instructions are moved from the main memory to the central processing unit
using wires and that was like the first half hour of the first day of programming and now some of
you have been with me for some time and now we're at the point where we're gonna understand what
exactly a central processing unit is okay so let me show you some of the artifacts that I used when
teaching that class so let's start with the central processor I've shown you this AMD central processor
before we now know how to build this chip we understand that instructions will come into these
wires right so like if there is eight of them we can represent those eight wires as a hexadecimal
digit because we just learned how to do hexadecimal now the place that these instructions come from
in that same picture is the memory and so again you've got wires and four of these wires equals
one hexadecimal digit right lots of wires we got chips that store but we've also learned how to build
latches that are ways to store memory electronically and then retrieve that memory
but then we have to come up with a way to connect these things together and that's what's called a
motherboard right and so the cpu plugs in to the oops there we go cpu plugs into the cpu slot
the memory plugs into a memory slot and there are wires on this motherboard that are laid out
to pull so that the cpu can ask the memory for some data instructions and it comes here and we
also load and store the you know the things we're going to compute from the memory as well and so if
you look at this it's got like big and small wires it's mostly wires with these little through holes
that are soldered into the wires you can see kind of big things they're like roads and lakes but
these wires go and so again i'm gonna sorry i'm gonna get all stuck on this four of these little
pins i mean eight of these little pins are two hex digits so we can represent all these pins perhaps
with a big long hex string and that's kind of why we're so obsessed with hexadecimal i'm clearly
obsessed with hexadecimal and the other thing that i showed students in the very beginning
was this disk drive now modern computers don't have disk drives that actually have any physical
spinning but basically this was magnetic material and this head would go in and out i think this is
now broken but the head would go in and out and the data would be stored on cylinders up and down
and so this head would move in and out and if you're old enough you would remember your computer
while you're reading disk it would go grunt grunt grunt grunt well that grunt is this stuff moving
back and forth and it seems as though i have had this over 10 years and i've scratched it and i've
broken it but you get the idea that this was long-term storage and you could store a lot more data
than you can in ram there the memory is fast and efficient but limited and disk drives are much
larger in terms of the amount of data they can store and once stored it stays there and doesn't
require power now the other thing that i showed my students the other thing that i showed my students
is something a little bit more modern which is a little more like what's in your cell phone etc
and this is a raspberry pi and what's happened is as they can manufacture more and more stuff on a
single chip you can get to what's called a single chip computer so in this it's got the cpu it's
got some long-term storage it's got the ram etc etc and so this is got everything in it because
it's really just electronic stuff and as the manufacturing capability got better and better
this is an arm processor which we'll talk about later and some ram etc and this is one of the
early raspberry pies so 15 years ago it was a little easier to show computer architecture
by showing the components that made up computer architecture it's not just a picture it was
physical devices that implemented the computer architecture the instructions were stored in the
memory the whole program when the computer was off was stored on the hard drive loaded into memory
etc and the motherboard connected all of these pieces together so the next thing that i described
to my students in si 502 python for everybody is how we construct programs and these are the
essential things like a recipe or an installation instructions a program is a sequence of steps to
be done in order like the macarena some steps are conditional they may be skipped and another way
you have a group of steps that may want to be repeated and the fourth way is like functions we
store and retrieve a set of steps we are going to cover the first three of these in machine language
to sort of prove to you that machine language can do exactly what high level languages do
just with a different syntax and a different level of detail that you you're limited with
what you can do in machine language some people feel like machine language's limitations is kind
of wonderful until you start writing really complex programs okay but the first few machine
language you're like wow this is kind of nice maybe i should have learned this at the beginning
so now into some python we have first sequential steps you just write lines of code one after the
other and like x equals two print x that prints out the two x equals x plus two we just added to two
to x and then print x so what next what next the cpu through its program counter is advancing
through the instructions and doing whatever it is until it executes a halt instruction
which means okay we're now done you the programmer have said we're done there's also conditional
steps like you know x equals five if x is less than 10 print smaller if x is greater than 20
print bigger or print funny and so this is things like the print smaller is going to run but the
print bigger is not going to run and we represent these on the left hand side with a flow chart and
so i have been teaching with flow charts a lot of people think flow charts are uncool
but in the next couple of lectures you're going to appreciate flow charts because in a sense we are
guiding the what next bit to either do something or skip something and so logically they're beautiful
the the code in python is beautiful there are these blocks they either run or don't run
but really what we're doing at a lower level is we're manipulating where the computer is
picking its next instruction from and this all will come together in a little bit and it gets
even more complex when we do repeated steps right where we have an iteration variable
we have a loop so n equals five while n greater than zero that's a top tested loop with a question
mark and if n is still greater than zero we run the body of the loop print it and then subtract
one from it and now then we know that we go back up to the top of the loop and the first thing we
do at the top of the loop is test it again is n as changed is n still greater than zero i mean if
it's not getting zero we skip and finish and print blast off and if it is still greater than zero we
run the iteration again and again you of course can create infinite loops with this if you don't
change the iteration variable each time through the loop and that brings us to variables so a
variable is a place in memory where a programmer can store data and then later retrieve it using
a variable name like x equals 12.2 y equals 14 and then x equals 100 replaces it now for some of you
who took my Django course i finally admit that x is not just a drawer that's got a label on it
x is a pointer to an object so x equals 12.2 means 12.2 is an object and x refers to that object when
we say x equals 100 there's another object called 100 and x has changed a point to that so if you've
taken my c class then you realize that with pointers that this is exactly true a variable
is a place where you can put one in exactly one value and when you reassign it that value is
replaced just like this picture up next we're going to learn about how variables work in machine
language and it will probably come as no surprise to you that they work exactly like how c thinks
about them because c is one of the lowest level programming languages which is just a tiny step
above machine language and so instead of being python with all its object orientation eventually
that whole python object orientation turns into machine language but variables don't exactly work
like this slide tells us but in machine language this slide is exactly correct so let's get to that